Nicholas Samoray
Dr. Creel
Global Politics Midterm

Comment: Please ignore any typos or spelling errors, I've been forced to use ViM which has no spell/error check and I worry some may have slipped through even after multiple proof readings. Thanks.

1. The major flaw in this research design is that the analysis never considers states that haven't been in a civil war. Even if those 47 states that are observed all have highly divergent resource allocation, there's nothing to compare it to. What if every state in the world has highly divergent resource allocation? If that were the case then the data means nothing. There needs to be some sort of control, something to compare and contrast with. Otherwise, if this is considered valid, then there's no reason for example that if the majority of these countries had a Burger King, that I couldn't say it was Burger King causing these civil wars. Without a control group or something to compare to, the data is useless. It can be easily remedied by including one and also lookin into states that haven't experienced civil war. Otherwise the rest seems fine, there's no reason why the theory couldn't work and the definitions and sample size all seem fair enough. 

2. The prisoner's dilemma is a game theory concept in which two actors each have a decision to make. The decision is either to act selfishly or act selflessly essentially, with the actions taken by each actor determining the final result. This concept is significant among many aspects of comparative politics, from nuclear deterrance to the relation between a government and it's citizens. Hobbes addresses this in The Leviathan as a social contract between those that are governed and those that rule. The contract stating that those governed are bound by that contract to act in some way for the greater good, be it taxes or public service, in exchange for security and stability from those that govern. 

3. States can be formed in a variety of contexts, be it Military, Economic, or Cutural. The military context is one wherein people band together for security or to conquer, with the more people being banned together meaning the more taxes and bodies that can be put towards an army. Another context, economic, is when people band together for economic reasons, be it trade routes or taxation, in order to all benefit from it. Finally the cultural context is when people are bound together by some sort of common culture, say religion or background. The surrounding environment factors heavily into all of these contexts and can also determine under which context people form a state and how successful they are. However not all states are formed at the same time. States that form later are often formed out of some kind of conflict or outside power, take for example Europe post WW2 or Africa and the Middle East in the post colonial period. Many of these states had no say in their borders or governments, instead being dictated by other states or circumstances beyond their control. This often led to weak and unstable states which little common ground other than they had no other choice, for example east and west germany, or modern day Iraq. All countries that either no longer exist or are extraordinarily unstable. 

4. A state has territory, a government, people, and recognition. A nation, government, and society are all components of this. A nation is essentially people in a territory who identify themselves as together, sometimes with a government othertimes without. Many of these nations are recognized states themselves, such as France, but others aren't and are split between several states, such as Kurdistan. A government is just that, just the governing aspect of a state and the part that gets recognized, not including the territory or people. Finally a society is typically the people aspect of a state, but still not a state without a government, territory, or recognition.

5. Prime ministers are the heads of a parlimentary style of government whereas presidents are typically the heads of representative styles of government but have a less significant role in parlimentary systems. Other differences include that prime ministers are voted in by the representatives, typically of the ruling party/plurality, whereas the president is voted in by a common vote. 

6. Pure marxist communism is about giving the means of production to the people so that all are equal in terms of wealth and status. The people reap the fruits of their labor and everyone gets a piece of the pie. Compare this to fascism which is a totalitarian system of government led by a single dictator, typically supported by a small elite political class, who mobilizes the workforce typically towards a single common goal. This system is also marked by a cult of personality and a heavy military focus. 

7. Totalitarian governments are essentially extreme versions of Authoritarian governments. While both are led by a single strong leader, totalitarian systems typically have a far more mobilized population as well as the leaders having an almost cult like persona. Compare for example Iran and Nazi Germany. Iran, while led by a single leader in practice, never had the kind of mobilization and push towards a common goal like Nazi Germany. Instead it is seen as more "normal" so to say, not as fanatical or single minded as the governments of North Korea or Nazi Germany. 

8. It is thought that civil culture will push for democracy and a more open/equal regime. However the issue with this line of thinking is that it becomes a sort of chicken or the egg problem, democracy needs civil culture in order to succeed, yet civil culture needs democracy to really flourish. It becomes difficult to have one without the other indicating that there may be an issue with the theory.

9. There is of course the marxist theory of economics effecting regime change in that really, all people want is to be equal in terms of their wealth and status, that any regime change really works towards this common goal. Since it is Marx, where else would this lead up to but socialism and communism. However the other theory of economic change wherein people don't want necessarily to be equal, but rather just the necessities. When the bare essentials become difficult or impossible to obtain, the population has no choice but to revolt. It changes form an issue of whether a regime should change, to an issue wherein the regime has to change in order for society to survive.
